# GenAI--Backend

Gen-AI based Automated Data Analytics Platform

This details the projects components and how it functions/flows.

The system is built for automated analysis and narrative report generation from tabular data. How it functions:
User will provide their raw tabular datasets (Excel & .csv)- along with any personal custom instructions from the user -into the interface. The system will then begin with data cleaning and preprocessing, then present a preview of the cleansed dataset, the preprocessing steps taken, and an Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) to give users an overview of the dataset, includes data types and statistical summaries -The EDA is performed in isolation. Additionally to make processes faster/smoother this section will be cached for more efficient re-runs. The UI will also feature a progress bar, to indicate the current step and the systems progression. 

The preprocessed data is then moved on to the next step, Identifying the Target Column (this is the column to perform the analysis on) along with the problem type (Classification or Regression). The system will first ensure, no target column has been specified by the user (in the custom instructions), if a particular column had been mentioned, then the system would directly move on to the AutoML tournament. In the case it has not been specified, the system will score each column based on pure statistical heuristics, the highest aggregate score will be the proposed target column. If multiple columns score within a similar range, the system will prompt the user to choose their desired target column.

Once the target column and problem type have been identified, it along with the preprocessed data will be sent to the AutoML tournament, To select the best model for analysis. Multiple models will be tested against each other on various parameters, The winners will be ranked on a primary metric based on the problem type -F1-weighted for Classification, R² for Regression. The "Top 3" models will be presented to the User (in a collapsed section in the "AutoML Insights" page), with the winning model moving forward for the analysis and insight generation -The full leaderboard will be in the developers section of the report.

The selected model will be trained on the users dataset, and extracts feature importance scores for each column. Once that is done, it will start with the analysis and insights generation, through Statistical Analysis (aggregates, trend comparison, segmentation, etc), and supported by SHAP explanations for directional impact analysis. These are then structured into a packaged .json file and sent to the RAG Layer. This helps further contextualize the insights and analysis with real world policies and context, further grounding our insights and reducing hallucinations, in order to achieve the most accuracy possible.

Visualization and Narrative generation are done via LLMs, for this project Claude Sonnet 4.6 is currently responsible for both -Gemini Flash was initially responsible for the visual generation, but after numerous failed attempts on the server end, we moved away and decided to use a unified LLM for both. The system makes two separate calls to Claude for the Visuals and Narrative, so the task and prompts given are focused on one particular task, allowing for less error and hallucination risks.

The Visualization call occurs once the ML insights have been completed, it along with the preprocessed data will be sent to Claude, to generate the visuals. The prompt set is to allow dynamic chart creation, so Claude has been instructed to create 6 relevant and professional charts for the given data -This unfortunately led to an increase in processing time, to combat it; the system prompt will include boundaries, which reduces the time taken to "think" of appropriate visuals, this allows for better variety and processing. Additionally, if the user specifies particular charts or visuals (in the custom instructions), those will take precedence. Once created the visuals will be displayed to the user, in the "Visualizations" page. This will include 4 interactive charts (with the ability to swap with 2 other charts), which will be done through recharts (GitHub repository).

The Narrative call will be done at the very end, once all other processes are completed, it will include the EDA, RAG structured insights and the (4 selected) visuals. This will all be passed onto Claude to create the structured report. It will consist of an "Executive Summary", "Key Findings" -the visuals will be incorporated and cohesively weaved with the text- and finally a Developers section -which includes process runtimes, tournament results and model specifications. This will be presented to the user in an embedded PDF viewer on the front end with the ability to export it as .PDF file -the embedded report will not include the visuals, they will be weaved in once the user exports it.

